Journal of Network and Information Security

Volume 05 Issue 01, 2017
ISSN.: 2321-6859

Optimized Outlier Based Web Bot Detection
R. Peter1, D. Divya2
1
M.Tech Scholar, Department Computer Science & Engineering, Adi Shankara College of Engineering & Technology
Ernakulam, Kerala, India. Email: respapeter@gmail.com
2
Assistant Professor, Department Computer Science & Engineering, Adi Shankara College of Engineering &
Technology, Ernakulam, Kerala, India. Email: a.divya.d@gmail.com
Abstract: By the turn of century, the use of computers and
accessing internet were rapidly increases. As the increasing
the network access it increases the network attacks also.
The nature of attacks may vary in each day. Today’s trends
of attacks are web bots. Web bots can be used for both
useful and destructive purposes. Now a day’s attackers use
bot nets for malicious intents. Bots are basically a computer
program that surf multiple websites without the intention
of the user to perform variety of tasks. If any web bots were
present in network it may distort the analysis process which
leads to incorrect pattern and cause wrong decision making.
The web bots requests were different from genuine request.
So it can consider web bots are example of outliers and
detect them using outlier detection methods. In this project
use Swarm Intelligent (SI) based technique called Particle
Swarm Optimization technique (PSO) for detect outliers or
web bots. The efficiency of PSO algorithm depends on its
parameters. For improving the efficiency of PSO algorithm
it need some changes in its parameters. So for improving
the efficiency of outlier detection optimization based HPSO
(Hierarchical Particle Swarm Optimization) algorithm
were used.
Keywords:

Clustering, Optimization, Outlier, PSO.

I. Introduction
Data mining is search large stores of data automatically to find
patterns and trends that go beyond simple analysis process. To
segment data and evaluate the probability of future events data
mining uses sophisticated large algorithms. One of the major
research topics in Knowledge Discovery in Data (KDD) is
Outlier Detection. Outliers can be defined as data objects which
deviate from other data objects.
The outliers are formed because of any experiment errors or
any measurement changes. If detecting outliers in data mining
it improve the data processing task more fruitful by removing
the abnormal or error data from the dataset (M. M. Breunig,
2000), (L. Duan, 2009). The application of outlier detection
method can be used in different environments such as Fraud
Detection (Credit card, telecommunications, criminal activity
in e-Commerce) Customized Marketing (high/low income
buying habits), Medical Treatments (unusual responses to

various drugs), Analysis of performance statistics (professional
athletes), Weather Prediction Financial Applications (loan
approval, stock tracking). Detection of web bots use the
application of outlier detection. Outlier detection mainly came
in data mining tasks.
Web bots can be used for both useful and destructive purposes.
Now a day’s attackers use bot nets for malicious intents. Bots
are basically a computer program that surf multiple websites
without the intention of the user to perform variety of tasks.
If any web bots were present in network it may distort the
analysis process which leads to incorrect pattern which leads to
wrong decision making. The web bots requests were different
from normal different. The attackers will send spam mail to
practicing click-fraud it may deviate the users to un wanted
pages and they cause attacks without the users willing. For web
bot detection process we can use optimization based technique
There are several algorithms are in data mining used for the
outlier detection, If use data mining algorithms for detecting
web bots or malware it may not be effective. For effectively
detecting outliers can use optimization based algorithms
like PSO (Particle Swarm Optimization). PSO is one of
the optimization techniques in today’s technology. PSO is
stochastic population based optimization technique. Kennedy
and Eberth were introducing PSO in 1995. The PSO algorithm
belongs to Swarm Intelligence (SI) computation technique and
which inspired from social behavior of birds flocking or fish
schooling.
The Computation of PSO algorithm significantly affect by the
parameters. It is possible to improve the efficiency of PSO
algorithm for Outlier or web bot detection by making changes
in its parameter setting through this way it exposes desirable
computational behavior with some settings. So the important
feature in PSO is that the different parameter settings which
exposes different computational behaviors. That is based on
the parameter settings the PSO algorithm may work efficiently
with some parameters in other case it may work undesirably
with some other settings. That’s the reason to say that PSO is
Parameter-Sensitive algorithm.

Outlier
An outlier in a dataset can be define as a measurement which
deviates from the other values. The most established definition

Optimized Outlier Based Web Bot Detection 15

for outlier given by (Hawkins, 1980) as “A judgment which
deviates so much from other observations as to arouse suspicion
that it was generated by a different mechanism”. Another
commentary for outlier is obsessed by (Barnett and Lewis,
1994) and defines an outlier as “an measurement (or subset of
measurements) which looks to be conflict with the rest of data
set”. Fig. 1 Illustrate the idea of outlier .

Fig. 1: Illustrate Outlier Data from a Given Data Set
An outlier may be due to inconsistency in the measurement
or it may caused by any experimental error. Outlier points can
therefore point out erroneous data points, fault procedures.
Suppose a considerable datasets will contain modest number
of outliers.

II. Particle Swarm Optimization
There are several algorithms are in data mining used for the
outlier detection, If use data mining algorithms for detecting
web bots or malware it may not be effective. For effectively
detecting outliers can use optimization based algorithms like
PSO. PSO is one of the optimization techniques in today’s
technology. PSO is stochastic population based optimization
technique. Kennedy and Eberth were introducing PSO in 1995.
PSO algorithm will solve discrete and continuous optimization
problems. The PSO algorithm belongs to Swarm Intelligence
(SI) computation technique and which inspired from social
behavior of birds flocking or fish schooling.
To solve optimization problem the concept of PSO algorithm
obtained from animals behavior. The population is called swarm
and the members in population are called its particles. The
optimization problem Starting with a randomly initialization
of the particles in population and moving in randomly chosen
directions, each particle goes through the searching space
and keep the track of best previous positions of itself and its
neighbors. Particles of a swarm communicate good positions to
each other as well as dynamically adjust their own position and
velocity derived from the best position of all particles. The next
iteration starts with all particles have been moved.
PSO make is an optimization based algorithm there were no any
other optimization algorithms were not used for web bot or also

for outlier detection. In data mining for outlier detection many
algorithms were used but they are not any optimization based.
So for efficient and also to get optimal result use optimization
based algorithm such as HPSO algorithm. PSO optimizes a
problem by having a population of candidate solutions, here
dubbed particles, and moving these particles around in the
search-space according to simple mathematical formulae over
the particle’s position and velocity. Each particle’s movement is
influenced by its local best known position but, is also guided
toward the best known positions in the search-space, which are
updated as better positions are found by other particles. This is
expected to move the swarm toward the best solutions. In the
problem space each particle keeps track of its coordinates which
are related with best fitness it has obtained earlier. The fitness
value will be store in each iteration. This value is known as pbes
t. When another best value called lbest value obtained by the
particle swarm optimizer finding best value with its neighbors
of the particle. When a particle takes all the population as its
topological neighbors, the best value is a global best and is
called gbest. That is in each iteration they search better position
using three basic learning components. they are:
∑∑ Cognitive Component (pBest)
∑∑ Social Component (gBest)
∑∑ Self-Organizing Component

Parameter Selection in PSO
The Computation of PSO algorithm significantly affect by the
parameters. It is possible to improve the efficiency of PSO
algorithm for Outlier or web bot detection by making changes
in its parameter setting through this way it exposes desirable
computational behavior with some settings. So the important
feature in PSO is that the different parameter settings which
exposes different computational behaviors. That is based on
the parameter settings the PSO algorithm may work efficiently
with some parameters in other case it may work undesirably
with some other settings. That’s the reason to say that PSO is
Parameter-Sensitive algorithm.
The imperative issue in PSO is that distinctive parameter settings
can prompt altogether unmistakable computational practices.
It may work effectively with some parameters, while it may
work undesirably with some different parameters. Despite the
fact that the sensitivities of different PSO variations as for their
parameters are diverse, PSO is completely considered as a
parameter-delicate calculation. In this way, the push to discover
ideal PSO parameters that lead to the best computational conduct
is of critical significance and much research exertion has been
put on it. For the most part, for setting PSO parameters, there
exists taking after systems in writing:
∑∑ Utilizing PSO variations with altered parameters. This
is the most generally utilized system as a part of PSO
writing. For this situation, parameter qualities are either
set as broadly acknowledged qualities from writing or set
on experimentation premise.

16 Journal of Network and Information Security

∑∑ Utilizing without parameter PSO variations which don’t
require any parameter setting procedure.
∑∑ Utilizing composite PSO. In this methodology, a heuristic
calculation is utilized to discover ideal PSO parameters,
however it has from time to time been utilized as a part of
PSO writing. The huge issue of this system is that it adds
fundamentally to the intricacy of the issue.
∑∑ Utilizing PSO variations with dynamic or versatile
parameters.

III. Related Works
An important research problem in data mining is an Outlier
detection which aims to recognize objects that are dissimilar
with other existing objects in data set. Outlier detection, also
known as anomaly detection in some literatures, has become
the enabling underlying technology for a wide range of practical
applications in industry, business, security and engineering, etc.
According to the verities in the data used for different domains
there were different types of outlier detection method can
choose. The selection of the method for detecting outliers are
depends on various factors. The selection of outlier detection
method mainly cares about the input data type and it also
depends on so many other factors such as data type distribution,
data availability and resource constraints etc.

A. Density Based Outlier Detection
This strategy contrasts the density around a point and its
nearby neighbors densities. The relative density of a point
contrasted with its neighbor is registered as an outlier score.
Density based outlier detection system utilizes density
distribution of data points inside of data set. The thought of
density based neighborhood outlier utilizing correlation with
density of nearby neighborhood was presented by Breuing
et al. This method correlate the density over a point with its
regional neighbors densities. The corresponding density of
a point compared to its neighbors is measure as an outlier
score. Density based outlier detection approach uses density.
Compared to distance based approach density based method is
higher convoluted mechanisms to model the outlier ness of the
data items. By analyzing the central aspect or feature of object
in database it can determine the outlier. The nearest neighbors
are comparitatively proximate in this approach, then the data
point is considered to be normal, diversely it is considered as
an outlier.

Volume 5, Issue 1, June 2017

B. Clustering Based Outlier Detection
Cluster analysis is prevalent unsupervised methods to bunch
comparative information occurrences into clusters. Clustering
parcels the information into gatherings, in which comparative
articles are contained. The expected conduct of outliers is that
they either don’t have a place with any cluster, or are compelled
to have a place a cluster where they are altogether different
from different individuals then again fit in with little clusters. If
the number of normal attribute is more than abnormal behavior
attribute then use cluster based outlier detection method .If
an object does not resides to any cluster or there is high gap
between the object and its adjacent cluster or it fit to inadequate
cluster then that object is considered as an outlier. By applying
this process it will achieve more confident result. This method
is used in those situation when large and dense cluster have
normal data and data which does not belong to any cluster
or small cluster (low dense cluster) are consider as outlier. In
cluster based approach normal data records belong to large
and dense clusters, while outliers do not belong to any of the
clusters or form very small clusters.

C. Distance Based Outlier Detection
Distance based outlier detection method judge a point based
on the distance(s) to its neighbors. Express distance-based
methodologies are based on the well known nearest-neighbor
standard. Ng and Knorr propose an all around characterized
distance metric to identify outliers. They characterize outlier as
the object which is more prominent in distance to its neighbors.
The essential algorithm, the settled circle (NL) algorithm, figures
the distance between each pair of objects and afterward set as
outliers those that are far from most objects. The NL algorithm
has quadratic unpredictability, concerning the quantity of
objects, making it inadmissible for mining extensive databases,
for example, those found in government review information,
clinical trials information, and system information.

D. Statistical Based Outlier Detection
Statistical outlier detection utilizes certain sort of statistical
distribution and processes the parameters by expecting
all information focuses have been created by statistical
distribution. In this methodology outliers are focuses that have
a low probability to be created by the general distribution
Statistical outlier detection strategy is otherwise called
parametric methodology. This strategy is detailed by utilizing
the distribution of information point accessible for preparing.
Detection model is defined to fit the information with reference
to distribution of information.

Optimized Outlier Based Web Bot Detection 17

In Table 1.1 show the some popular techniques existed in today.
Table 1: Literature Survey
Method
Local outlier factor
(LOF)

Advantage
Can applied to various
other problems

Disadvantage
Less Sensitive.
Computationally expensive.
Requires a large number of k-nearest neighbors
search.
Can’t detect a cluster of outliers.
Less Accurate
Micro cluster based
Eefficiently found top-n outliers in large data- Runtime complexity
base. Introduce a cut-plan solution for over-lap- High cost.
LOF
ping data. Good performance to find the most They compute it for the top n-outliers only.
outstanding local outliers.
Inefficiency
Data must be loaded in to the memory to implement algorithm
FP-Outlier: Frequent Pat- It is very robust.
Not appropriate for discovering outliers in a high
tern Based Outlier Detec- High performance on low dimension data.
dimensional space.
tion
Algorithm has a high computational cost.
Eefficient implementation
Computationally intensive. Causes the abnormality.
bin PSO

Less computation time.
Need high memory
Can handle both discrete binary and continuous Parameters will effects its working
variable.

There are number of outlier detection methods are used in data
mining but for detecting web bots efficiently use optimized
based detection method that is PSO based outlier detection. So
propose Hierarchical clustering based PSO algorithm.

IV. Methodology
For this work we use Hierarchical Particle Swarm Optimization
(HPSO) algorithm for the efficient clustering purpose. Use this
HPSO algorithm for perform agglomerative manner clustering.
Firstly partition the dataset in to tiny clusters and perform
merging of smaller clusters. The merging form a hierarchy
clusters. There are two modules included in this work.
∑∑ Clustering Module
∑∑ Outlier Detection Module

A. Clustering Module
For the clustering process we use hierarchical clustering. HPSO
clustering initially partition the data set in to tiny clusters and
then merge them in an agglomerative manner. The merging
performed based on the learning of particle swarm optimization.
For moving to the centroid of the clusters to better positions use
cognitive and self-organizing components of the swarm.

Veli (t +1) = w ¥ Veli (t ) + q1r1 ( pBesti (t ) - X i (t ) + q2 r2 (Yi (t )
- X i (t ))))

The new position of particle is Xi (t + 1) and the current
position is Xi (t). From the cognitive and self-organizing
components of the swarm we get new velocity Veli
(t + 1) for calculating the new velocity of particle. Here pBesti
(t) – Xi(t) is the cognitive learning component and Yi (t) – Xi
(t) is self-organizing component of the swarm. The cognitive
component means the learning of particle from its own
experience. The particles best position termed pBest. This
variable need to update each updating to get the better position
of the particle. In each iteration the swarm moves to better
position and merge smaller clusters to nearest higher cluster.

C. Outlier Detection Module
When merging the smaller clusters it need to calculate a distance
threshold to identify whether a particle cluster is genuine or not.
We calculate this distance threshold relate to the configuration
of data and average intra cluster distance and maximum intracluster distance. Average based intra-cluster distance. In this
cluster we calculate the distance by using the below formula.
The Outlier detection decision done based on the average
and maximum intra cluster distance based calculations. The
Calculation mainly done based on following equations.

18 Journal of Network and Information Security

Volume 5, Issue 1, June 2017

VI. Future Work

C. Average Intra-Cluster Distance
For calculating the average intra cluster distance we use the
equation
Thresh Dist ( X i ) =

Dt
¥
k

k

Â (Y j - X i )2
j =1

Based on the threshold distance value will implement the dataset.
It chose different values of threshold distance as a function of
average intra-cluster distance and record the number of outliers
found in the log. At larger values offewer web bots have been
detected and vice versa. The right most part represents the large
number of outliers found at smaller values of Dt.

D. Maximum Intra Cluster Distance
ÔÏ
Thresh Dist ( X i ) = Dt ¥ arg Max in= 0 Ì
ÓÔ

k

Ô¸

j =1

˛Ô

Â (Y j - X i )2 ˝

Maximum intra-cluster distance as a threshold distance
calculated using equation and extracted the suspected web
bots. At smaller values of Dt fewer web bots have been detected
and vice versa.

E. Intersection of Maximum and Average Intra-Cluster
Distance
The results of overlap when the intersection of avg. and max.
intra-cluster distance was used to detect web bots. The overlap
increases when the number of suspected web bots decreases
because of the smaller number of true negatives.

V. Conclusion
To implement this system use one of the popular Swarm
Intelligence (SI) based techniques called Particle Swarm
Optimization (PSO) to detect Outliers. Here web bots are
considered as web bots. So it need to detect web bot among
genuine user requests. Use Particle Swarm Optimization
(PSO) based clustering algorithm, Hierarchical Particle Swarm
Optimization based clustering (HPSO-clustering) to cluster the
web-usage data and detect the abnormal behavior caused by the
web bots. However it is still not develop the issue of automating
the parameter selection process in web bot detection. In
proposed scenario going to deal with the tuning parameters in
PSO algorithm for selecting the process. Different strategies for
setting each PSO parameter are explained and analyzed deeply.
After obtained optimized result we can stop the parameters
based on the decision maker. Finally it provides high accuracy,
fast convergence results. It takes less computational time to
execute this process. Introduced a Particle Swarm Optimization
(PSO) based clustering technique called Hierarchical Particle
Swarm Optimization based clustering (HPSO-clustering) to
detect web bots in the web usage data.

There are still some problems and inefficiencies can detect
in the existing work. This technique still include some issues
in performance, generalization and extendibility. It need to
improve extendibility performance and generalization of this
system, which would useful for further investigation. Need to
find how to obtaining these efficiencies in to the system. In
future work mainly focus to the efficiency improving process.
The performance of PSO algorithms is a parameter dependent,
that is its always performs based on its parameter. Scaling the
outlier detection to high dimensional data is another future
research direction.
The future research work contains the generalization of these
techniques, automating the parameter selection process, and
application of HPSO-clustering based outlier detection method
in different domains other than with web usage data. Introduce
new parameters for this achievement. Inertia weight is used
to control the velocity in this scenario. It is the process of
providing balance between exploration and exploitation process
in general. The Inertia Weight determines the contribution rate
of a particle’s previous velocity to its velocity at the current
time step. A large Inertia Weight facilitates a global search
while a small Inertia Weight facilitates a local search. Inertia
Weight is based on the function of local best and global best of
the particles in each generation. It neither takes a constant value
nor a linearly decreasing time-varying value. To overcome
the weakness of premature convergence to local minimum,
Adaptive Inertia Weight strategy is proposed to improve its
searching capability.

References
[1]

M. M. Breunig, H.-P. Kriegel, R. T. Ng, and J. Sander,
“Lof: identifying density-based local outliers,” In
Proceedings of the 2000 ACM SIGMOD International
Conference on Management of Data, New York, NY,
USA: ACM, pp. 93-104, 2000.

[2]

L. Duan, L. Xu, Y. Liu, and J. Lee, “Cluster-based outlier detection,” Annals of Operations Research, vol. 168,
no. 1, pp. 151-168, Apr. 2009.

[3]

W. Jin, A. K. H. Tung, and J. Han, “Mining top-n local outliers in large databases,” In Proceedings of the
Seventh ACM SIGKDD International Conference on
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, New York, NY,
USA: ACM, pp. 293-298, 2001.

[4]

Z. He, X. Xu, J. Z. Huang, and S. Deng, “Fp-outlier:
Frequent pattern based outlier detection,” Computer
Science and Information Systems, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 103118, 2005.

[5]

F. Angiulli, S. Basta, and C. Pizzuti, “Distance-based
detection and prediction of outliers,” IEEE Transactions
on Knowledge and Data Engineering, vol. 18, pp. 145160, 2006.

Optimized Outlier Based Web Bot Detection 19

[6]

[7]

[8]

S. Ramaswamy, R. Rastogi, and K. Shim, “Efficient algorithms for mining outliers from large data sets,” In
SIGMOD ’00: Proceedings of the 2000 ACM SIGMOD
international conference on Management of Data, pp.
427-438, 2000.
S. D. Bay, and M. Schwabacher, “Mining distancebased outliers in near linear time with randomization
and a simple pruning rule,” In Proceedings of the ninth
ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge
Discovery and Data Mining, New York, USA: ACM,
pp. 29-38, 2003.
S. Guha, R. Rastogi, and K. Shim, “ROCK: A robust
clustering algorithm for categorical attributes,” In
Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on
Data Engineering, ICDE ’99, Washington, DC, USA:
IEEE Computer Society, pp. 512-521, 1999.

[9]

R. T. Ng, and J. Han, “CLARANS: A method for clustering objects for spatial data mining,” IEEE Transactions
on Knowledge and Data Engineering, vol. 14, pp. 10031016, 2002.

[10]

L. Kaufman, and P. J. Rousseau, Clustering Large
Applications (Program CLARA), John Wiley & Sons,
Inc., pp. 126-163, 2008.

[15]

D. Yu, G. Sheikholeslami, and A. Zhang, “Findout;
Finding outliers in very large datasets,” Knowledge and
Information Systems, vol. 4, pp. 387-412, 2002.

[16]

C. Aggarwal, and S. Yu, “An effective and efficient algorithm for high dimensional outlier detection,” The
VLDB Journal, vol. 14, pp. 211-221, April 2005.

[17]

G. Williams, R. Baxter, H. He, S. Hawkins, and
L. Gu, “A comparative study of RNN for outlier detection in data mining,” In Proceedings of
the 2002 IEEE International Conference on Data
Mining, Washington, DC, USA: IEEE Computer
Society, pp. 709-712, 2002.

[18]

A. W. Mohemmed, M. Zhang, and W.N. Browne,
“Particle swarm optimization for outlier detection,” In
GECCO, 2010, pp. 83-84.

[19]

S. Hawkins, H. He, G. J. Williams, and R. A. Baxter,
“Outlier detection using replicator neural networks,”
In Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on
Data Warehousing and Knowledge Discovery (DaWaK
2000). London, UK: Springer-Verlag, pp. 170-180,
2002.

[20]

S. Alam, G. Dobbie, P. Riddle, and M. A. Naeem,
“Particle swarm optimization based hierarchical agglomerative clustering,” IEEE/WIC/ACM International
Conference on Web Intelligence and Intelligent Agent
Technology, vol. 2, pp. 64-68, 2010.

[11]

M. F. Jaing, S. S. Tseng, and C. M. Su, “Two-phase
clustering process for outliers detection,” Pattern
Recognition Letter, vol. 22, pp. 691-700, May 2001.

[12]

L. Duan, L. Xu, F. Guo, J. Lee, and B. Yan, “A localdensity based spatial clustering algorithm with noise,”
Information System, vol. 32, pp. 978-986, November
2007.

[21]

S. Alam, G. Dobbie, Y. Koh, and P. Riddle, “Clustering
heterogeneous web usage data using hierarchical particle swarm optimization,” In IEEE Symposium on Swarm
Intelligence (SIS), pp. 147-154, 2013.

[13]

M. Ankerst, M. M. Breunig, H.-P. Kriegel, and J. Sander,
“Optics: ordering points to identify the clustering structure,” SIGMOD Rec., vol. 28, pp. 49-60, June 1999.

[22]

[14]

S. Alam, G. Dobbie, P. Riddle, and M. A. Naeem, “A
swarm intelligence based clustering approach for outlier detection,” In IEEE Congress on Evolutionary
Computation (CEC), pp. 1-7, 2010.

S. Alam, G. Dobbie, and P. Riddle, “Exploiting swarm
behavior of simple agents for clustering web users session data,” In Data Mining and Multi-agent Integration,
Springer, pp. 61-75, 2009.

[23]

S. Alam, “Intelligent web usage clustering based recommender system,” In Proceedings of the fifth ACM
Conference on Recommender Systems, pp. 367-370,
2011.

